+++
title = "PAC Learning"
author = ["Jethro Kuan"]
lastmod = 2019-03-20T16:38:58+08:00
tags = ["machine-learning"]
draft = false
math = true
+++

## ERM for finite hypothesis classes {#erm-for-finite-hypothesis-classes}

We note that [empirical risk minimization]({{< relref "machine_learning" >}}) can easily overfit
to the training data. To correct for this, we introduce inductive
bias, restricting the hypothesis space \\(\mathcal{H}\\).

The simplest type of restriction is to impose an upper bound on the
size of a class. Here, we show that if a hypothesis class is finite,
then ERM will not overfit given a sufficiently large sample size.

Let \\(h\_S\\) denote the result of applying ERM to \\(S\\):

\begin{equation}
  h\_S \in \textrm{argmin}\_{h \in \mathcal{H}} L\_S(h)
\end{equation}

We make 2 assumptions. First, the realizability assumption, implying
that every ERM hypothesis we have that \\(L\_S(h\_S) = 0\\). However, we are
more interested in the true risk \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S)\\) rather than the
empirical risk.

<div class="definition">
  <div></div>

The Realizability Assumption: There exists \\(h^\* \in \mathcal{H}\\) such
that \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h^\*)= 0\\). That is, with probability 1 over random
samples \\(S\\), where the instances are sampled according to \\(D\\), and
labelled according to \\(f\\), we have \\(L\_S(h^\*) = 0\\).

</div>

Any guarantee on the error with respect to the underlying distribution
\\(D\\), must depend on the relationship between \\(D\\) and \\(S\\). Here, we
make the second assumption that the training examples are drawn i.i.d.

Since \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S)\\) depends on the training set, which is drawn via
a random process, it is also a random variable.

We introduce 2 parameters:

1.  the probability of getting a non-representative sample, denoted by
    \\(\delta\\). We denote \\((1 - \delta)\\) the confidence parameter of our prediction.
2.  We denote \\(\epsilon\\) as the accuracy parameter of the prediction.
    The event that \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) > \epsilon\\) is a failure of the
    learner, while \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) \le \epsilon\\) is the event where the
    predictor is approximately correct.

We are interested in upper bounding the probability to sample m-tuple
of instances that will lead to failure of the learner. Formally, let
\\(S\_x = \left(x\_1, \dots, x\_m \right)\\) be the instances of the training
set. We would like to upper-bound:

\begin{equation}
  D^M(\left\\{ S\_x ; L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) > \epsilon \right\\})
\end{equation}

Let \\(H\_B\\) be the set of bad hypotheses, that is,

\begin{equation}
  \mathcal{H}\_B = \left\\{ h \in \mathcal{H} : L\_{(D,f)}(h)> \epsilon \right\\}
\end{equation}

In addition, let:

\begin{equation}
M = \left\\{ S\_x: \exists h \in \mathcal{H}\_B, L\_S(h) = 0 \right\\}
\end{equation}

be the set of misleading samples. For every \\(S\_x \in M\\), there is a
bad hypothesis, \\(h \in \mathcal{H}\_B\\) that looks like a good
hypothesis in \\(S\_x\\).

Since the realizability assumption implies \\(L\_S(h\_S) = 0\\), then the
event \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) > \epsilon\\) will only happen if our sample is
in the set of misleading examples \\(M\\).

Then:

\begin{equation}
  D^m(\left\\{ S\_x : L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) > \epsilon \right\\}) \le D^m(M)
  =D^m(\cup\_{h \in \mathcal{H}\_B} {S\_x: L\_S(h) = 0})
\end{equation}

Because the training samples are i.i.d.:

\begin{align}
  D^m(\left\\{ S\_x: L\_S(h) = 0\right\\}) &= D^m(\left\\{ S\_x: \forall i,
                                         h(x\_i) = f(x\_i) \right\\}) \\\\\\
  &=  \prod\_{i=1}^{m}D(\left\\{ x\_i: h(x\_i) = f(x\_i) \right\\})
\end{align}

for each individual sampling of an element of the training set, we
have:

\begin{equation}
  D(\left\\{ x\_i: h(x\_i) = y\_i \right\\}) = 1 - L\_{(D,f)}(h) \le 1- \epsilon
\end{equation}

Using the inequality \\(1 - \epsilon \le e^{-\epsilon}\\), we obtain that:

\begin{equation}
  D^m(\left\\{ S\_x: L\_S(h) = 0 \right\\}) \le (1 - \epsilon)^m \le
  e^{-\epsilon m}
\end{equation}

Applying the union bound, we get:

\begin{equation}
  D^m(\left\\{ S\_x: L\_{(D,f)}(h\_S) > \epsilon \right\\}) \le \left| \mathcal{H}\_B \right|(1 - \epsilon)^m \le
  \left| \mathcal{H}\_B \right| e^{-\epsilon m}
\end{equation}

With this result, we can show that where \\(m \ge
\frac{\log(|\mathcal{H}|/\delta)}{\epsilon}\\), the error \\(L\_{(D,f)(h\_S)
\le \epsilon}\\) for every ERM hypothesis \\(h\_S\\).


## Formulation {#formulation}

<div class="definition">
  <div></div>

A hypothesis class \\(\mathcal{H}\\) is PAC learnable if there exist a
function \\(m\_{\mathcal{H}} : (0,1)^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{N}\\) and a
learning algorithm with the following property: For every \\(\epsilon,
\delta \in (0,1)\\), for every distribution \\(\mathcal{D}\\) over
\\(\mathcal{X}\\), and with respect to \\(\mathcal{H}, \mathcal{D},
\mathcal{f}\\), then when running the learning algorithm on \\(m \ge
m\_{\mathcal{H}}(\epsilon, \delta)\\) i.i.d. examples generated by
\\(\mathcal{D}\\), and labeled by \\(f\\), the algorithm returns a hypothesis
\\(h\\) such that, with probability of at least \\(1 - \delta\\) (over the
choice of examples), \\(L\_{(D,f)}(h) \le \epsilon\\).

</div>

The accuracy parameter \\(\epsilon\\) determines how far the output
classifier can be from the optimal one, and the confidence parameter
\\(\delta\\) indicates how likely the classifier is to meet the accuracy
requirement.

Under the data access model, these approximations are inevitable: for
example, the training set is randomly generated, and there is a chance
the training samples will be non-informative.


### Sample Complexity {#sample-complexity}

The function \\(m\_{\mathcal{H}}: (0,1)^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{N}\\)
determines the sample complexity of learning \\(\mathcal{H}\\): that is,
how many examples are required to guarantee a probably approximately
correct solution.

We have shown previously that every finite hypothesis class is PAC
learnable with sample complexity:

\begin{equation}
  m\_{\mathcal{H}} (\epsilon, \delta) \le \lceil \frac{\log(|\mathcal{H}|/\delta)}{\epsilon} \rceil
\end{equation}

There are infinite hypothesis classes that are PAC learnable, and the
combinatorial measure called the VC dimension is what deterimines its
PAC learnability.


## Generalizing the Learning Model {#generalizing-the-learning-model}


### Removing the Realizability Assumption {#removing-the-realizability-assumption}

We have initially required that the learning algorithm succeeds on a
pair of data distribution \\(D\\) and labeling function \\(f\\) provided that
the realizability assumption is met. For practical learning tasks,
this assumption is too strong.

The realizability assumption requires that there exists \\(h^\* \in
\mathcal{H}\\) such that \\(\mathbb{P}\_{x \sim D} [h^\*(x) = f(x)] = 1\\). We
replace the


### Learning Problems beyond binary classification {#learning-problems-beyond-binary-classification}

Many learning tasks take a different form, such as regression tasks,
where a real-world value is predicted. Formally, let \\(\mathcal{D}\\) be
a probability distribution over \\(\mathcal{X} \times \mathcal{Y}\\),
where \\(\mathcal{X}\\) is our domain set, and \\(\mathcal{Y}\\) is a set of
labels. \\(\mathcal{D}\\) is a joint distribution over domain points and
labels. We can think of it as being composed of two parts: a
distribution \\(D\_x\\) over unlabeled domain points, and a conditional
probability over labels for each domain point, \\(D(x,y) | x\\).

For a probability distribution \\(D\\), one can measure how likely \\(h\\) is
to make an error when labeled points are randomly drawn according to
D. We redefine the true error to be:

\begin{equation}
  L\_D(h) = D(\left\\{ (x,y): h(x) \ne y \right\\})
\end{equation}

We would like to find a predictor \\(h\\) for which the error is
minimized. However, the learner does not know \\(D\\), but instead has
access to its training data, \\(S\\).


### The Bayes predictor {#the-bayes-predictor}

Given any probability distribution \\(D\\) over \\(X\\), the best label
predicting function \\(X\\) to \\(\left\\{ 0,1 \right\\}\\) will be:

\begin{equation}
f\_D(x) = \begin{cases}
  1 & \textrm{if } P[y=1|x] \ge \frac{1}{2} \\\\\\
  0 & \textrm{otherwise }
\end{cases}
\end{equation}

This is the Bayes optimal predictor, and no other classifier has a
lower error. It can be shown that no algorithm can be guaranteed to
find a predictor that is as good as the Bayes optimal predictor.

Now, we require that the learning algorithm will find a predictor
whose error is not much larger than the best possible error of a
predictor in some given benchmark hypothesis class. The strength of
such a requirement depends on the choice of that hypothesis class.
That is, the algorithm returns a hypothesis \\(h\\) such that with
probability \\(1 - \delta\\):

\begin{equation}
L\_D(h) \le \textrm{min}{h'\in \mathcal{H}} L\_D(h') + \epsilon
\end{equation}


## Learning Via Uniform Convergence {#learning-via-uniform-convergence}

Given a hypothesis class, \\(\mathcal{H}\\) The ERM learning paradigm
works as follows: upon receiving a training sample, \\(S\\), the learner
evaluates the risk of each \\(h\\) in \\(H\\), on the given sample, and
outputs a member of \\(H\\) that minimizes this risk. Hence, all we need
is that uniformly over all hypotheses in the hypothesis class, the
empirical risk will be close to the true risk. We formalize it as
follows:

<div class="definition">
  <div></div>

A training set \\(S\\) is called a $&epsilon;$-representative sample
(w.r.t. domain \\(Z\\), hypothesis class \\(\mathcal{H}\\), loss function \\(l\\),
and distribution \\(D\\)) if

\begin{equation}
  \forall h \in \mathcal{H}, | L\_S(h) - L\_D(h)| \le \epsilon
\end{equation}

</div>

Whenever a sample is (&epsilon;/2)-representative, the ERM learning
rule is guaranteed to return a good hypothesis.

This lemma implies that to ensure that the ERM rule is an agnostic PAC
learner, it suffices to show that with probability of at least \\(1 -
\delta\\) over the random choice of a training set, it will be an
$&epsilon;$-representative set. This is referred to as the _uniform
convergence_ property.

<div class="definition">
  <div></div>

A hypothesis class \\(H\\) has the uniform convergence property (w.r.t.
domain \\(Z\\), and loss function \\(l\\)) if there exists a function
\\(m\_{\mathcal{H}}^{Vc} : (0,1)^2 \rightarrow \mathbb{N}\\) such that for
every \\(\epsilon, \delta \in (0,1)\\) and for every probability
distribution \\(\mathcal{D}\\) over \\(Z\\), if \\(S\\) is a sample of \\(m \ge
m\_{\mathcal{H}}^{VC}(\epsilon, \delta)\\) examples drawn i.i.d according
to \\(\mathcal{D}\\), then with probability of at least \\(1 - \delta\\), \\(S\\)
is $&epsilon;$-representative.

</div>

We also need the measure concentration inequality by Hoeffding, which
quantifies the gap between empirical averages andn their expected
value:

<div class="definition">
  <div></div>

Let \\(\theta\_1, \dots, \theta\_m\\) be a sequence of i.i.d. random
variables, and assume that for all \\(i\\), \\(E[\theta\_i] = \mu\\) and P[a
&le; &theta;\_i &le; b] = 1$. Then for any \\(\epsilon > 0\\):

\begin{equation}
  P\left[ \left| \frac{1}{m}\sum\_{i=1}^{m}\theta\_i - \mu \right| >
    \epsilon \right] \le 2 \textrm{exp} \left( \frac{-2m\epsilon^2}{(b-a)^2} \right)
\end{equation}

</div>

Classes of functions for which the uniform convergence property holds
are also called Glivenko-Cantelli classes. The fundamental theorem of
learning theory states that in binary classification problems, uniform
convergence is not only a sufficient condition for learnability, but
is also a necessary condition. This is not the case for more general
learning problems.
